---
layout: episode
title: "68: Year of the Snake - Python UDFs"
date: 2025-01-16
tags: trino 
youtube_id: "IjncfSBqhbY"
wistia_id: "tbd"
sections:
- time: 0:00
  title: Introduction
- time: 
  title: Release 465-468
- time: 
  title: Other news
- time: 
  title: Guest and topic intro
- time: 
  title: Upcoming events
introduction: |
  Manfred and Cole are joined by David Phillips to talk about the new support of
  user-defined functions written in Python. We discuss motivation, development
  history, dive into implementation details, and run some demos.
---

## Host

* [Manfred Moser](https://www.linkedin.com/in/manfredmoser), Director/Open
  Source Engineering and Trino maintainer at [Starburst]({{site.url}}/users.html#starburst) -
  [@simpligility](https://x.com/simpligility)
* [Cole Bowden](https://www.linkedin.com/in/cole-m-bowden), Developer Advocate
  at [Firebolt](https://www.firebolt.io/)
  
## Guests

* [David Phillips](https://github.com/wendigo), Trino co-creator and maintainer

## Releases 

Follow are some highlights of the Trino releases since episode 67:

[Trino 465]({{site.baseurl}}/docs/current/release/release-465.html)

* Add support for customer-provided SSE key in S3 file system relevant for Hive,
  Iceberg, Delta Lake and Hudi connectors.
* Deterministic data, locale support and random_string function for the Faker
  connector.
* Add for `extra_properties` in the Iceberg connector.
* Add support for the `geometry` type in the PostgreSQL connector.

[Trino 466]({{site.baseurl}}docs/current/release/release-466.html)

* Remove Python requirement for Trino by replacing the launcher script.
* Improve client protocol throughput by introducing the spooling protocol stable
  and ship with documentation, includes implementation in JDBC driver and CLI.
* Add support for data access control with Apache Ranger, including support for
  column masking, row filtering, and audit logging.

[Trino 467]({{site.baseurl}}docs/current/release/release-467.html)

* Change default for internal communication to HTTP/1.1.
* Add support for OpenTelemetry tracing to the HTTP, Kafka, and MySQL event listener.
* Remove the `microdnf` package manager from the Docker image.
* Add the `$all_manifests` metadata tables in Iceberg connector.
* Add the $transactions metadata table in Delta Lake connector.

[Trino 468]({{site.baseurl}}/docs/current/release/release-468.html)

* Add [Python user-defined functions]({{site.baseurl}}/docs/current/udf/python.html).
* Rename SQL routines to SQL user-defined functions.
* Add cluster overview to the Preview Web UI. 
* Improve bucket execution for Hive and Iceberg.
* Add support for non-transactional `MERGE` statements for PostgreSQL.

As always, numerous performance improvements, bug fixes, and other features were
added as well.

## Other news

* [Trino Gateway 13](https://trinodb.github.io/trino-gateway/release-notes/#13)
* [Trino Summit recap]({% post_url 2024-12-18-trino-summit-2024-quick-recap %})
* [Trino in 2024 and beyond]({% post_url 2025-01-07-2024-and-beyond %}), answer
  our survey!
* December 2024 Trino maintainer and contributor calls took place virtually.
* Trino Python client 0.332.0 includes support for spooling mode of client
  protocol.

## User-defined functions in Trino

First there was [custom plugins with user defined
functions]({{site.baseurl}}/docs/current/develop/functions.html), and for a long
time that was all there is.

In 2023 David contributed SQL user-defined functions, also known as SQL
routines, and we ran a [competition for examples]({% post_url
2023-11-09-routines %}). Manfred wrote the docs and did a [training session with
Dain and Martin]({% post_url 2023-11-29-sql-training-4 %}). And even back then,
David had plans to add other languages, and started working on Python.

At [Trino Summit in 2024]({% post_url 2024-12-18-trino-summit-2024-quick-recap
%}) Martin Traverso announced the new upcoming feature in the keynote, and with
[Trino 468]({{site.baseurl}}/docs/current/release/release-468.html) we shipped
support for [Python user-defined functions]({{site.baseurl}}/docs/current/udf/python.html).

## Motivation

Why support Python for user-defined functions, as compared to just SQL? Simply
put, more is better and Python is everywhere. We chat with David about the
details.

## Development history and collaboration

David tell us more about figuring out how to make it all work at all. He touches
on topics such as security, performance, deployment, monitoring, and
collaboration with other projects. We also talk about why other approaches like
using local CPython were discarded.

## Architecture and consequences

In this discussion we talk try to cover the following topics:

* How does it all work?
* What are some restrictions?
* What performance can users expect?

## Examples and demo

A simple example from the documentation:

```sql
FUNCTION python_udf_name(input_parameter data_type)
  RETURNS result_data_type
  LANGUAGE PYTHON
  WITH (handler = 'python_function')
  AS $$
  ...
  def python_function(input):
      return ...
  ...
  $$
```

David shows us more, and we talk about the details.

## Feedback and future work

We are looking for feedback:

* More examples for the documentation for our users
* Use cases and experience testing the feature
* Production deployment experiences 

Future work depends on the feedback but definitely includes the following:

* Performance improvements
* Fine-tuning of available Python packages

## Resources

* [Python](https://www.python.org/)
* [WebAssembly (Wasm)](https://webassembly.org/)
* [Chicory](https://chicory.dev/)
* [Trino user-defined functions overview]({{site.baseurl}}/docs/current/udf.html)
* [Python user-defined functions]({{site.baseurl}}/docs/current/udf/python.html)

## Rounding out

* You are all invited to chat with us about development at the Trino contributor
  call on the 23rd of January.
* Join us on the 30th of January with Mateusz Gajewski to learn about client
  protocol improvements.

If you want to learn more about Trino, check out the definitive guide from
O'Reilly. You can get [the free PDF from
Starburst](https://www.starburst.io/info/oreilly-trino-guide/) or buy the
[English, Polish, Chinese, or Japanese
edition]({{site.url}}/trino-the-definitive-guide.html).
