---
layout: post
title: "AI and poetry meet Trino"
author: Martin Traverso, Marcos Traverso
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
image: /assets/images/graphics/trino-openapi-header.png
---

Sometimes when working in the depth of the query engine core, the planner, the
optimizer, or some other tricky problem or code, you run out of steam and need a
distraction. Your brain will quietly work on the problem in the background while
you get to read or do something interesting.

During one break we found out more about GPT-3 and the recent improvements on
the OpenAI project. So we had to try.

<!--more-->

It's pretty amazing that you can feed the AI a prompt just like we did:

```
Write a short rhyming poem explaining Trino in easy but accurate terms
```

And after a few trials, the best one produced by GPT-3 was this:


> Trino is a tech platform,<br>
> That makes data integration a breeze,<br>
> It's designed to help your business grow,<br>
> And optimise your systems with ease.<br>
> <br>
> It links together different sources,<br>
> Both big and small,<br>
> Gathers data of different types,<br>
> Helping you make decisions for all.<br>
> <br>
> So Trino is an integration tool,<br>
> That connects data for you,<br>
> It'll ease the burden of data sync,<br>
> Giving you more time to do what you do.<br>

Cool, huh? Have a look at another prompt:

```
Write a short rhyming poem explaining Trino, the SQL query engine in complex
and accurate terms.
```

And the compelling result:

> Trino is a query engine that does more than just run,<br>
> It’s a SQL engine with performance that stuns.<br>
> It is secure, efficient, and kind,<br>
> Providing real-time analytics of any kind.<br>
> <br>
> It’s a distributed system that’s built to scale,<br>
> Processing queries that never fail.<br>
> Connecting to myriad data sources,<br>
> It can quickly analyze any course.<br>
> <br>
> It’s flexible, reliable, and fast,<br>
> And is designed to make your queries last.<br>
> It can handle large volumes of data with ease,<br>
> Making the most complex queries a breeze.<br>

If you are interested to learn more you can look at the
[blog post on Ars Technica](https://arstechnica.com/information-technology/2022/11/openai-conquers-rhyming-poetry-with-new-gpt-3-update/)
or go and try it yourself [on the playground](https://beta.openai.com/playground/).

Enjoy while we are heading back to [working on Trino pull
requests](https://github.com/trinodb/trino/pulls) and other code now.

Martin and Marcos