---
layout: post
title:  "Trino delivers for Amazon Athena"
author: Manfred Moser, Martin Traverso
image: /assets/trino-light.png
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

Our community just keeps growing! Today, it is time to reach out and welcome
another large group of Trino users. The release of the new engine version for
[Amazon Athena](https://aws.amazon.com/athena) upgrades Athena to a recent
version of Trino from a rather old version. This update brings a ton of
improvements from the Trino project to the users of the popular cloud-based
query service.

<!--more-->

## Shared history

Amazon Athena and Trino share a long history. From the beginning of Athena, the
query engine under the hood was Trino, then still called Presto. Athena created
a low-maintenance, powerful access mode to your data in S3 and beyond. It
combined the performance and features of Trino, with the convenience of a cloud
service, which enabled new users and use cases. You could take advantage of
Trino without needing a team of experts to deploy and operate a Trino cluster
for your organization. In fact, we wrote about this in the first edition of
**Trino: The Definitive Guide**. There is also a section in the [new second
edition]({% post_url 2022-10-03-the-definitive-guide-2 %}) that you can get for
[free from Starburst](https://www.starburst.io/info/oreilly-trino-guide/).

## Time flies

But since the initial release of Athena, time has not stood still. In fact, the
Trino project has accelerated in [innovation, features, and releases
tremendously]({% post_url 2022-08-04-decade-innovation %}). Until now Athena
users missed out on these improvements. However with the update Amazon Athena
users now get access to many of these great features. As [AWS mentions in the
announcement](https://aws.amazon.com/about-aws/whats-new/2022/10/amazon-athena-announces-upgraded-query-engine/),
"over 50 new SQL functions, 30 new features, and more than 90 query performance
improvements" are now available due the upgrade to a new version of Trino. These
include [Row pattern recognition with MATCH_RECOGNIZE]({% post_url
2021-05-19-row_pattern_matching %}), [new window features]({% post_url
2021-03-10-introducing-new-window-features %}), support for ``UPDATE`` or
``TRUNCATE`` statements, and many others.

Performance improvements in our core engine and all the Trino connectors show up
in every release note. The [improvements observed by the Athena team in their
benchmarks](https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/big-data/upgrade-to-athena-engine-version-3-to-increase-query-performance-and-access-more-analytics-features/)
show the resulting gains nicely. This is great evidence that our approach of
constantly working on small improvements wherever we find potential works well.
This approach is necessary since Trino is already at a very high performance
level, and like an elite athlete, where every small improvement matters.

It is also important to note that these improvements are only in the  Trino
version of the engine, since the [Presto project does not include these
features]({% post_url 2022-08-02-leaving-facebook-meta-best-for-trino %}).

## Client tools and collaboration

Athena users also benefit from improvements for supporting client tools such as
Python clients, dbt, Metabase and others. Working with other communities is of
critical importance to the Trino project. The [innovations in our Iceberg
connector]({{site.url}}/episodes/40.html) that are all now also available to
Athena users are a great example how we can lead the way together. Working with
contributors from Amazon and other companies and projects has yielded some
amazing improvements. At the [Trino summit and contributor
congregation]({{site.url}}/episodes/42.html), we to reconnected in person and
established even closer collaboration.

## Looking forward

So, what is next for Trino and Athena users? First up, you should upgrade to the
new Trino engine in Athena, and avoid the legacy Presto engine.

Second, check out some of the great presentations from [Trino Summit 2022]({%
post_url 2022-11-21-trino-summit-2022-recap %}) and [hear about some of our
impressions]({{site.url}}/episodes/42.html).

And last but not least, stay tuned for more goodness. Trino already shipped
further releases that included support for `MERGE`, table functions, and more
performance improvements. The Athena team is working hard on updating Trino for
your benefit regularly.

Celebrating our [first decade of the Trino project this last summer]({% post_url
2022-09-12-tenth-birthday-celebration-recap %}) has shown a great trajectory for
the project and the community, and it looks like the next decade is going to be
even better!

Sending a warm welcome from the Trino community to the Amazon Athena team and
users. Now you know that you were Trino users all along.

*Martin and Manfred*



