---
layout: post
title: "Share your best Trino SQL routine"
author: "Martin Traverso, Dain Sundstrom, David Phillips, Manfred Moser"
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
image: /assets/trino-sql-routine.png
show_pagenav: false
---

We want to see the best [SQL routines]({{site_url}}/docs/current/routines.html)
you can write, feature them as [examples in the
documentation]({{site_url}}/docs/current/routines/examples.html), and send you
some goodies as a reward!

<!--more-->

With the recent [Trino 431
release]({{site_url}}/docs/current/release/release-431.html) we shipped a
feature that has been awaited by many Trino users for a long, long time. [SQL
routines]({{site_url}}/docs/current/routines.html) are an easy way to define our
own procedural, custom functions. All users on your Trino instance can then use
that function in their queries and enjoy the new feature to simplify their
queries.

The new process of writing a routine in your client tool in SQL can be used as
alternative to the old way of having to create a custom plugin in Java,
compiling it, and getting the binary deployed in your cluster. The time it takes
to use a function has gone from hours to minutes and a few commands!

Our documentation includes details for all the supported statements:

* `BEGIN`
* `CASE`
* `DECLARE`
* `FUNCTION`
* `IF`
* `ITERATE`
* `LEAVE`
* `LOOP`
* `REPEAT`
* `RETURN`
* `SET`
* `WHILE`

With the memory connector and the Hive connector supporting routine storage, you
can use `CREATE FUNCTION` and `DROP FUNCTION`, so that everyone using the
cluster has access to your routines.

The unit tests and our [examples
documentation](({{site_url}}/docs/current/routines/examples.html)) contain a
number of routines that scratch the surface of what is possible. Now, we are
looking for you to help us improve the documentation and maybe even find some
bugs. So here is what we are asking from you:

* Upgrade your Trino cluster, CLI, and other clients to 431 or newer. Support in
  client tools may vary.
* Learn from the documentation and write your own routines.
* Send us your best SQL routine.
  * Create a pull request to add to the [examples in the
    documentation](https://github.com/trinodb/trino/blob/master/docs/src/main/sphinx/routines/examples.md)
    with a new section, and request a review from [Manfred
    (mosabua)](https://github.com/mosabua)
  * Alternatively, [email the details](mailto:manfred@starburst.io) and submit a
    [CLA](https://github.com/trinodb/cla) separately.
* Explain the use case, what the routine does, and maybe also how it works.
* Include the full statement for the `CREATE FUNCTION` definition and an example
  invocation.
* Add any necessary tables or data so we can test the function.
* Reach out to us on the [Trino community Slack]({{site.baseurl}}/slack.html),
  if you need any help.

We plan to present submissions at [Trino Summit 2023]({% post_url
2023-09-14-trino-summit-2023-announcement %}), write a blog post, add them to
the documentation, and [Starburst](https://www.starburst.io/) will send a cool
reward for the ten best entries.

Also, if you have more great Trino usage to talk about and share, we would love
to see your [speaker proposal for Trino
Summit](https://sessionize.com/trino-summit-2023/).

We look forward to seeing many great submissions from you all.

See you at Trino Summit 2023, and don't forget to
[register](https://www.starburst.io/info/trinosummit2023/?utm_source=trino&utm_medium=website&utm_campaign=NORAM-FY24-Q4-EV-Trino-Summit-2023&utm_content=blog-1).

*Martin, Dain, David, and Manfred*
